Maia 200: A Software Defined Dataflow System for
Large-scale AI Acceleration
Sherry Xu, Marco Heddes, Jackson Peng, Tom Savell, Monica Tang, Prashant Ranjan,
Jesse Benson, Ofer Dekel, Saurabh Dighe, Anupama Kurpad, Artour Levin, Matthew Mattina,
George Petre, Cheng Tang, Yuan Yu, Li Zhang, Torsten Hoefler
Microsoft Corporation
Abstract—We introduce Maia 200, an advanced AI accelera-
tor delivering high performance—10 145 Tflop/s FP4 and 5072
Tflop/s FP8 within a 750W TDP and 7 TB/s HBM bandwidth.
Maia exemplifies a new class of Software Defined Locally Ac-
cessed Dataflow Architectures (SDLA), which explicitly program
dataflow engines to orchestrate highly specialized memories and
data movement engines. This approach shifts the focus from
today’s thread-centric to data-movement-centric architecture,
improving efficiency and scalability. Our taxonomy of data
management, inspired by Flynn’s classification, highlights how
SDLA addresses challenges in modern AI computing. Maia 200
achieves significant cost and energy savings while supporting
massive parallelism for AI inference workloads, making it a com-
pelling solution for next-generation high-performance computing
systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
The advances in modern generative AI techniques have
taken the high-performance computing community by storm.
AI workloads, especially inference of Large Language Models
(LLMs), are now consuming most of the compute cycles
world-wide and building efficient high-performance systems to
support those workloads is crucial. We are in the middle of one
of the biggest infrastructure buildouts in human history – while
training systems are deployed in large datacenter supercom-
puters with hundreds of thousands of accelerators [19], [53],
inference systems even outnumber their computational capac-
ity. Based on public statements, we conservatively estimate
that each day, at least 1.2 trillion tokens are generated by such
systems world-wide. If we assume a relatively small 8 billion
parameter (8B) LLM, this would equate to a sustained compute
of 6.85 exaflop/s at any given moment; for a larger 400B
model, this would be 0.3 zettaflop/s. In addition, the largest
supercomputers deployed perform full-scale AI training. Soon,
the required total computation will be in the zettaflop/s range
and developing TCO- and CO 2e-efficient systems is most
important.
Here, we describe Maia 200, a top-of-the-line AI accel-
erator system, specialized to AI computing workloads de-
livering best-in-class performance with 10 145 Tflop/s FP4
/ 5072 Tflop/s FP8 performance per chip within a 750W
TDP (13.3/6.7 Tflop/W) and 7 TiB/s HBM bandwidth. A
distributed Maia 200 system integrating 6144 chips offers up to
62 exaflop/s FP4 throughput, 43 PiB/s memory, and 8.6 PiB/s
Ethernet network bandwidth. Internal data suggests that Maia
LSGA SDGA
SDLALSLA
Global
Implicit Load/Store Software-Defined Dataflow
Data Access
Data Movement
Local
SISD SIMD
MIMDMISD
A Data-Centric sibling to
Flynn’s Taxonomy (1972)
Instructions
Data
exemplifies
Fig. 1. A Modern Data Management Classification of Processors Inspired by
Flynn’s Original Instruction-focused Taxonomy from 1972.
200 saves 30% cost (TCO) and 15% energy compared to any
other AI accelerator in Microsoft’s fleet due to an aggressive
co-design strategy of AI workloads and architecture concepts
as well as specific microarchitecture implementation, software
stack, and workload implementation without over-specializing
to specific problems.
Maia implements a new type of accelerator, which
defines a family of emerging architectures that we call
Software Defined Locally Accessed Dataflow Architectures
(SDLA). Specifically, Software-defined Dataflow uses an
abstract machine model that makes data path program-
ming explicit.It is a similar architectural step to what Single
Instruction Multiple Threads (SIMT) was to define the warp-
based thread scheduling mechanism establishing classical
GPU architectures. It is very different in philosophy as SDLA
uses parallel and independent control and data instruction
streams to efficiently orchestrate highly specialized memories
and data movement engines,taking the spotlight away from
threads to focus on a data-movement centric view with
localized data access.
We first describe the fundamentals of Software-defined
Dataflow and its variant SDLA and then dive into details
on the Maia 200 workload requirements, chip and system
architectures.
arXiv:2608.24664v1  [cs.AR]  25 Aug 2026
II. ACCELERATINGDATAMANAGEMENT WITH
SOFTWARE-DEFINEDDATAFLOW
We describe a new family of computer architectures that is
aimed specifically at accelerating AI workloads at scale. The
main optimization goals are to optimize TCO and lower CO 2e
emissions by improving silicon area and overall system and
energy efficiency. We recognize that data management, which
comprises storing, moving, and converting data, is the most
challenging problem in modern computer architecture [33],
[60], [76]. Furthermore, AI workloads typically process large
amounts of data with massive parallelism in relatively regular
coarse-grained blocks with predictable control- and dataflow,
which we will later define more formally using the concept of
data obliviousness.
To describe the principles in more detail, we define a data-
management taxonomy that is similar to Flynn’s taxonomy of
instruction parallelism [20]. Our taxonomy is shown in Fig. 1
and distinguishes two dimensions of how compute elements
access data and how data movement is defined.
The vertical data access dimension is similar to Flynn’s
data dimension in that it defines whether the compute units
can access only local data (logically distributed memories)
or all data is accessed globally (logically a single memory).
We call thoselocally and globally accessed. Our horizontal
dimension, the data movement dimension is similar to Flynn’s
instruction dimension in that it defines how data movement
is orchestrated – either as part of the computation instruction
stream (Load/Store) or in a separate control instruction stream
(which we callSoftware Defined dataflow).
All four quadrants of our taxonomy have example systems
today: LSGA is used in standard multicore CPUs forming
the most established shared memory abstraction [21]. GPUs
or Cerebras’ WSEs [42] use LSLA with distributed scratch
pad memories. Some CPUs extend the standard load/store
model to SDGA by adding programmable DMA units such as
Intel’s I/O Acceleration Technology [72] or Data Streaming
Accelerator [9], AMD’s DirectPath I/O [1], or ARM’s AMBA
DMA [3]; all those use global data access in shared memory.
In this work, we emphasize Software-Defined Locally Ad-
dressed (SDLA) Dataflow architectures. Specifically, SDLA
separates dataflow execution from control to allow the pro-
grammer to orchestrate details of data management in a
fine-grained, parallel, and asynchronous manner to enable
ideal overlapping of computation and data movement. Fur-
thermore, SDLA’s distributed memories provide significant
opportunities for specialization and acceleration such as right-
sized memories collocated with execution units and optimized
data movement and type conversion acceleration units. Some
existing architectures such as AMD’s Xilinx-based Distributed
Network Architecture (XDNA) [58] or Samba Nova’s Recon-
figurable Dataflow Architecture [54] would fall roughly into
the SDLA category and industry adoption is growing. In this
work, we focus on our Maia 200 architecture, the second-
generation SDLA from Microsoft.
SDLA defines a new abstract machine model as a contract
between programmers and computer architects. It can be
seen as one step beyond Single Instruction Multiple Threads
(SIMT) architectures that form the basis of classical GPU
acceleration [43]. SDLA differs in that it does not focus
on sharing instruction streams between threads but on the
efficiency of data management. While SDLA enables instruc-
tion stream sharing between processing elements, it does
not enforce full warp-style synchronization at the program
level, enabling independent programming of all units. SDLA
fosters efficient programming of spatial architectures where
data locality and management are first-class citizens [23], [48],
[73].
Fundamentally, SDLA is based on three foundational prin-
ciples from a programming perspective:
1)SDLA exposes parallel low-level control programming
of accelerated data movement, conversion, and syn-
chronization engines to the programmer, compiler,
and software stack.This enables highest performance
and highest power efficiency through explicit control of
data management.
2)SDLA allows programmers to manage an efficient
system of distributed and specialized (on-chip and
in-pod) memories.This enables architects to optimize
memories and accelerate data movement with special
engines and programmers to minimize overheads.
3)SDLA enables architects to build systems offering
mostly deterministic performance to enable optimized
scheduling.This is powerful for implementing kernels
such as transformer attention, where much effort is
spent to adopt code to idiosyncrasies of current accel-
erators [62].
These principles enable compiler engineers to build
emulation layers and scheduling librariesthat behave sim-
ilarly to current firmware in existing accelerators and provide
a simplified programming interface. Yet it empowers expert
programmers to either use high-level programming for non-
critical pieces or dive into every detail of memory management
and scheduling for performance-critical code pieces. Current
classical accelerators like GPUs only offer one level of pro-
gramming such as CUDA while scheduling (e.g., warps) and
fine-grained DMA control are implemented in hardware or
firmware and thus out of the reach of typical programmers.
These principles also enable computer architects to
co-design execution engines for their taskssuch as data
movement, synchronization, or computation and thus optimize
silicon design. Current expert GPU programmers use “warp
specialization” as a technique to pipeline memory accesses
with computations. Yet, this software technique uses standard
warp threads for both purposes. SDLA is one step ahead in
that execution engines are specialized to their purpose and thus
more efficient when co-designed in hardware.
In summary,SDLA redefines the contract between archi-
tects and programmers to provide lowest level control but
at the same time enable an advanced software stack and
compiler to hide the complexity.Similar to how classical
GPUs hide details of the instruction sets (ISAs) through
MemoryCP
Engine
MemoryCP
Pre0 Pre1 Post0 Post1Macro-Instruction
Dataflow Instruction
Precondition on up 
to two semaphores
(wait)
Postcondition on up 
to two semaphores
(signal)
• DMA command
• Kernel invocation
• Network tx / rx
Control Processors run the control path: Enqueue 
Dataflow Instructions to the accelerator queues
HW Queues with Macro-Instructions :
• In-order execution of Dataflow Instructions
• Explicit synchronization through Semaphores in queues
DMA and Processing Elements  run the data path: Execute Dataflow Instructions
DMA
PE
Engine
DMA
PE
Fig. 2. Abstract Machine Model for our Dataflow ISA.
LLVM-like PTX abstractions [50], SDLA enables two layers
of programming where the programmer can choose to write
assembly code (cf. Streaming Assembly, SASS [38]) or higher-
level CUDA-like code. Thecontrol path(processors) is
programmed in a standard low-level systems language such as
C or C++ while theprogrammable data path uses a dataflow
instruction set architectureto execute complex dataflow
dependencies. The software stack can then build higher-level
functionality such as Python/PyTorch or Triton [70] interfaces
on top of the control and programmable data paths.
At a more abstract level, SDLA extends the classical GPU’s
SIMD to SIMT transition with a focus on data management.
It provides access to the programmable data path architec-
ture details for explicit accelerated data movement between
specialized memories on-chip and across chips. Software-
defined means that the application logic is supported by
control programs that orchestrate the data path. This
makes SDLA a statement about control (synchronization and
data movement) and not about application logic and it thus
supports both SPMD (e.g., OpenMP [14], MPI [47]) and
MPMD (e.g., separating different coupled components such as
prefill and generation phases in LLM inference) programming
styles.
We show an example of our generic SDLA dataflow ar-
chitecture in Fig. 2. It uses control programs written in a
programmer-accessible high-level systems language such as C
or C++. Those programs run in the control path and orchestrate
the dataflow computation in the data path through queued
instructions. The data path itself comprises different units
for data management and processing. Those units support
a dataflow instruction set architecture (Dataflow ISA) that
defines synchronization pre-conditions, a macro-instruction,
and synchronization post-conditions. The management of pre-
and post-conditions can be fully implemented in hardware
and macro-instructions can either be complex hardware-
instructions such as a tensor-core matrix multiplication or
software functions invoked on programmable processors such
as vector units.
III. THEMAIA200 SYSTEM
Microsoft’s AI Architecture (Maia) 200 is Microsoft’s
second- generation of AI accelerators implementing an SDLA
dataflow architecture. It is highly optimized for Microsoft’s
inference workloads to enable extreme-scale transformer-
based LLMs at competitive cost and energy consumption
throughout the worldwide fleet. It’s designed to run a very
defined workload through extreme co-design of hardware,
software, deployment, and operational aspects of the system.
To achieve this, it embraces a new programming philosophy
that delivers lower TCO and energy consumption. Yet it is not
overspecialized and supports future workload shifts.
Maia 200’s architecture takes advantage of the SDLA pro-
gramming view to improve silicon and energy efficiency and
thus cost. Specifically:
•Maia 200’s architecture uses specialized small memories
attached to specific functional units to improve silicon
and energy efficiency.
•Maia 200 organizes those memories and compute units
hierarchically to take advantage of locality in workloads
and programming.
•Maia 200 extends seamlessly into the network. The
network interfaces are driven as part of the programmable
data path, e.g., data moves seamlessly from local SRAM
or HBM into remote SRAM or HBM.
Maia 200 is fabricated in TSMC’s 3nm process with more
than 140 billion transistors on a near reticle-sized monolithic
die (26x33mm). It uses CoWoS-S packaging technology to
co-locate HBM on a silicon interposer in a 75mm x 75mm
package with a total of 750 W SoC TDP distributed via
19 metal layers. It is a full system including tray, rack, and
network architecture scalable to thousands of accelerators in
a single cluster and it is in production in the fleet today. It is
mainly optimized for delivering highest efficiency for massive
inference workloads using trillion-parameter frontier models
as this is the main demand today.
A. Inference workload challenges at scale
Maia 200 is specifically designed for inference workloads of
large LLMs including Mixture of Expert layers [63]. Much of
the workload has soft real-time requirements in that a user is
waiting for the output relying on relatively strict SLAs for
example 300 – 4000 ms to first token and 20-30 ms per
token. Inference generally can be split in two components:
prefill and decode. Prefill computes the first output token
from the concatenated system and user prompts, which can
be tens of thousands of tokens while decode generates token-
by-token based on the contextual history in the KV cache [75].
Thus, prefill usually uses the system architecture in a balanced
manner while decode is often memory-bandwidth limited due
to the KV cache accesses.
Batching can change the balance by re-using weights across
elements of a batch but decode still requires loading a separate
KV cache for each batch entry. Maximal batch sizes are
limited by the SLA as well as the accelerator’s memory size
and parallelization [8]. Inference systems can utilize lower-
precision datatypes such as FP4 or FP8 if used with fine-
grained scaling factors [49], [52]. Prefill and decode phases
can be disaggregated to bandwidth-optimized and compute-
optimized accelerator configurations. Typically, batching re-
sults in a relatively large number of compute and communica-
tion operations, often involving several kilobytes or megabytes
of data.
In general, inference of large LLMs requires a cluster of
petaflop/s accelerators to perform the task for multiple requests
simultaneously [41], [79]. The Maia 200 system architecture
designs such a supercomputer cluster system with 62 exaflop/s
FP4 performance that enables specialization to the different
phases and 8.6 PiB/s network connectivity to enable efficient
inference.
Alongside those common challenges in large-scale LLM
inference, we explicitly model new trends that will shape
future workloads:
1) Massively growing context windows are required by rea-
soning models [10] that implement chain, tree, or graph
of thoughts, multimodal models including images, voice,
and even videos, and retrieval augmented generation
(RAG). Those require hundreds of thousands to millions
of tokens and extreme bandwidths in wide data paths
(Section III-B3).
2) Growing models require more compute power and mem-
ory bandwidth per token; diffusion models need even
more compute power for many iterations (Section III-B4).
3) Coarse-grained sparsity and dynamic computations gen-
erate more data movement that can only be scheduled
at runtime. The prime examples are Mixture of Experts
(MoE) [63] systems that often require all-to-all commu-
nication at extremely high bandwidths. Thus, the control
path must be fast to implement data-dependent control
(Section III-B5).
4) Agentic systems and tool use agents cause more complex
workflows [67], potentially involving multiple accelera-
tors with different models that need to be tightly coupled
(Section III-C).
In general, the extremely fast-growing demand makes reducing
energy consumption and cost even more important in the near
future.
B. The Maia 200 System on Chip
While Maia’s foundational innovation lies in adopting the
SDLA principles outlined above, the Maia 200 SoC requires
many staple features for modern AI accelerators, such as:
Specialized (scaled block) narrow datatypes to enable
hardware-efficient inference and training without significant
accuracy loss:Maia 200 emphasizes block-scaled FP4 and
FP8 tensor compute.
A capable Network on Chip (NoC) to connect the reticle-
sized massive monolithic chip:Maia 200’s NoC is physically
split into a logical high-bandwidth data NoC and a specialized
control NoC to keep data- and control traffic separate. The data
NoC also supports QoS to prioritize different data traffic (e.g.,
coming from NIC or HBM).
High HBM bandwidth, connected to the NoC to deliver
highest bandwidth to all units:Maia 200 uses six HBM3e
stacks.
Tensor cores with complex operations:Maia 200’s flexible
Tile Tensor Units support matrix multiplications as well as
convolutions natively, a feature only announced for future
GPUs.
Cluster SRAM (35 MB)
Cluster NoC (Data, MSG, CFG)
CCP
CSYNC
HBM0
HBM3
Controllers
MAC/PCS
Cluster 4x
Global NoC (Data, MSG, CFG)
Tile 1D mesh NoC 
 for 10 Tiles
PCIe 6x8
HBM3
PHY
HBM3
PHY
HBM5
HBM3
Controllers
112G 
PAM4 PHY
NIC NIC
MAC/PCS
112G 
PAM4 PHY
NDMA NDMA
28x 400Gbps 
Ethernet
HBM
6x HBM3
7TB/s total 
PCIe6 x 8
64 GB/s
TSYNC
TTU Re-shaper TCP
TSRAM (3MB)
TDMA
TVP
Tile 10x
Maia 200 SoC
Utilities:
SoC Power 
Management
Debug & Performance 
Monitoring, 
Secure Boot
PCIe6 PHY
PCIe 6x8
DCP
DSYNC
DSRAM
Device Control
CDMA
DDMA
ANC
Fig. 3. Maia 200 Abstract System on Chip Architecture. Processing blocks
are shown in red, the data path is green with data movement accelerators
in light green and memories in darker green, the NoC is in yellow, and the
control path is in blue with synchronization engines in light blue and control
processors in darker blue.
Advanced power management features (DVFS):Maia 200
offers power steering through separate clock domains for
compute, the NoC, and the HBM subsystem. This allows us
to specialize chips at deployment in different configurations,
e.g., optimized for prefill or generation.
In addition to those staple features that are a must-have for
any modern AI accelerator, Maia 200 innovates on multiple
fronts using SDLA principles:
•Control and data management are implemented sepa-
rately, allowing us to optimize highly-specialized units
such as DMA, synchronization (hardware semaphore),
and processing elements.
•The NoC offers multicast capability to efficiently dis-
tribute data to all clusters at full bandwidth.
•PEs are equipped with highly specialized memories, for
example, the Tile Tensor Unit uses highly specialized
memories to access inputs and outputs.
•Additionally, an on-chip hierarchy of specialized mem-
ories supports efficient near- (within an on-chip cluster)
and far (remote on-chip cluster) communications.
•The system offers several specialized programmable data-
movement and data management accelerators supporting:
Strided DMA operations for 1D, 2D, 3D, 4D tensors
including scatter/gather support and line-rate datatype
casting and sparsity support in the Tile DMA engines.
•Extreme network bandwidth while keeping the network
below 20% of the system cost, key are the 28 integrated
co-designed NICs with a simplified transport protocol and
an innovative network topology using mostly fixed links
saving switches and cables.
Fig. 3 shows the overall logical architecture of a Maia
200 SoC. The central compute complex is formed by four
Clusters on the chip die. Each of the four clusters contains
nine or ten Tiles. Each Tile contains one Tile Tensor Unit
(TTU) and one Tile Vector Processor (TVP), a specialized tile
memory, DMA engines, Synchronization (Sync) engines, and
a Tile Control Processor (TCP). The tiles are connected by
a special Tile 1D mesh NoC to enable faster communication
among each other. Each of the four Clusters has a separate
Cluster SRAM (CSRAM), a Cluster Control Processor (CCP),
Synchronization blocks, and DMA engines. The global NoC
(GNoC) connects all clusters, the HBM, the host system via
PCIe, and the Integrated NIC block (AI Network Controller,
ANC). The chip is coordinated by a Device Control block
including a Device Control Processor (DCP) as well as SRAM
and specialized DMA and Sync engines. The SoC also con-
tains utility functions for power management, performance
monitoring, debugging, and secure boot. All-in-all, Maia 200
is a capable microarchitecture implementing the SDLA ideas.
We will elaborate on some of the design decisions below.
1) Explicit Scratchpad versus Caches for SoC SRAM:
There is a subtle tradeoff between caches and explicitly
programmed scratchpad memories. Hiding fast cache mem-
ories between the main memory and registers is simplest for
entry-level programmers. However, for extreme performance-
conscious ninja programming, the discussion becomes more
complex. Ninja programmers usually consider the details of
the cache to optimize their data access patterns. This can be
quite complex and non-portable depending on the complexity
and documentation of the cache itself. For example, cache
replacement strategies, associativity, and cache-line sizes must
be considered when writing the highest-performing code [4],
[18], [30], [59], [65], [66]. Yet not all code pieces are
performance critical and getting reasonable performance at
lowest initial investment and simpler programming remains
an important goal.
First, we look at AI workloads: An important property of
algorithms is whether they are data oblivious. An algorithm is
data oblivious (or oblivious for short) if all memory accesses
and dataflow can be computed based on a small number of
parameters that are available at compilation time. Most AI
workloads are a static composition of fixed kernels (MMM,
SoftMax, non-linearities, etc.) that are all oblivious, making
the overall dataflow oblivious and thus plannable [25]. There
are some small exceptions such as continual/dynamic batching,
Mixture of Experts, other forms of sparsity, and early termi-
nation [26]. All those can either be handled in a parametric
way that takes advantage of their near obliviousness, or they
are at the very coarse control level and thus not critical
for performance. In summary, themostly oblivious and
thus plannable AI workloads enable ninja programmers
and compilers to statically plan all data movement and
placement in an overall optimized (if not optimal) schedule
using distributed memories and accelerated data paths
efficiently[5], [40], [48], [80].
Caches are considered vital for many applications and
enable extremely quick time to first implementation. In fact,
one can show that, for an LRU replacement cache with unit-
sized cache-lines that is twice as large as a scratchpad memory
using the optimal (offline) memory management scheme, the
cache will at most have twice as many misses [37], [57]. Thus,
LRU caches are only a small constant factor of about four
away from optimal. This minor overhead is often tolerable, so
CPUs and most general-purpose GPUs use caches to make
programming easier. Thus, we carefully study the benefits
programmers as well as computer architects could gain from
replacing caches.
Alongside the previously mentioned energy and cost sav-
ings—up to four times—ninja programmers are also able
to orchestrate highly efficient data transfers for AI tasks.
Similarly, for a set of HPC workloads, including many non-
oblivious codes, Marinelli et al. [46] showed a mean geometric
speedup of 13% when manually porting those from caches to
scratchpad memories. Specifically, ninja programmers benefit
from scratchpad memories in that (1) Data can be placed
and packed at word-granularity in all memories. Cache line
size and cache line sharing play no role, which simplifies
the handling of non-contiguous fine-grained data significantly.
(2) Programmers do not need to worry about replacement
schemes and keeping the right data in cache or issuing special
uncached load/store instructions for streaming accesses (such
as weights) that may block the pipeline. They simply keep the
data that they want in scratchpad and overwrite it explicitly.
(3) Programmers do not need to account for hidden prefetch
streams. In SDLA, programmers orchestrate all details of
asynchronous pipelining through accelerated data movement
engines. And finally, (4) specific extensions such as 1D/2D/3D
tensor loads and/or datatype conversions can save a significant
number of CPU instructions [39], [61].
Hardware implementations of caches are also more expen-
sive than software: in addition to the SRAM cells, they require
tag memory arrays and address remapping logic. The area and
energy overhead for this logic is around 30-35% [6], [46].
Furthermore, the access latency is increased by 10-15% due
to address decoding and mapping [6], [46]. Overall, this causes
an area-time and dynamic energy overhead of up to 43% in
practice [46].
Our explicitly programmed SDLA memory architecture
enables Maia 200 to spend less than 20% of its chip space
on memory, which is far less than many CPUs with smaller
cache sizes. Furthermore, all SRAMs and the HBM are ECC
protected and can be scrubbed on demand to protect the large
die from bit flip corruption. The specialized DMA engines
to orchestrate the data movement occupy only negligible die
area.
To unify the best of hardware design and plannable soft-
ware, Maia 200 aims to use compilers to utilize software-
managed scratchpad memories at low programmer complexity
and reasonable performance [2], [68], while ninja program-
mers will have the choice to orchestrate the data move-
ment at the lowest levels. Compilers offer basic support for
Python/PyTorch and Triton programming at the top level
while ninja programmers can dive into writing C/C++ control
programs for some kernels to use the architecture at highest
efficiency. In this work, we focus on both the hardware and
system architecture and thus will not describe the software
stack.
2) Dataflow Programming and Instructions:Maia 200
combines several types of computational and data management
(memory and data movement) units to implement an SDLA
microarchitecture. It combines two main types of compute
units paired in each Tile: A Tile Tensor Unit (TTU) and a Tile
Vector Processor (TVP). TVPs can execute complex programs
written in C/C++ while the TTU supports a large set of
fixed dataflow instructions (matrix multiply and convolutions).
DMA engines support a fixed instruction set for moving
data between memories. Each Tile DMA engine includes a
Reshaper engine that can perform data conversions between
different formats and data layout changes such as transposition
at line-rate.
Each of those engines supports a specific set of powerful
macro-instructions, which can be full programs (e.g., in
TVPs) or fixed functions (e.g., in TTUs or DMA engines).
Those macro-instructions are part of adataflow instruction
set architecture (DISA), which defines a set of dataflow
preconditions, a macro-instruction to invoke, and a set
of dataflow postconditionsas shown in Fig. 2. Each ba-
sic (dataflow and compute) execution engine supports DISA
instructions that are used to orchestrate the overall dataflow
program. Dataflow conditions are managed using sync engines
that offer logical semaphore objects that are assigned by
the control program. Each semaphore can be configured to
fire at a specific threshold. Each dataflow instruction can be
configured to wait for up to two semaphores before executing
(precondition). After the execution finishes, it can signal
up to two semaphores (postconditions), which in turn could
trigger another dataflow macro-instruction. All wait and signal
conditions have a programmable decrement or increment value
and commands can be chained to enable more complex
synchronization conditions.
Maia 200 includes a hierarchy of different types of con-
trol processors that orchestrate the dataflow programs using
the execution units and sync engines to manage the overall
data flow. The control program orchestrates the setup of
the dataflow instructions and semaphores ahead of time and
the overall dataflow program executes asynchronously with
respect to the control program (which usually runs ahead).
This scheme can implement optimal dataflow for oblivious
programs without any delays due to the parallelism of control
and dataflow in hardware. We offer a simple C++-based low
level programming language called NEsted PArallel Language
(NEPAL) to program the control path.
3) Connecting Memories and Compute Engines:Maia 200
uses memories that are directly attached to compute engines
for highest efficiency. They are sized according to Little’s
Law [44] to satisfy the dataflow throughput of the engines
for pipelined and overlapped loading and computing as well
as to maximize reuse of data and minimize data movement
and addressing overheads.
Each tile has 3 MiB of specialized SRAM to hold the
operands for the TTU. Each TTU can perform 65 536 Multiply
Accumulate (MAC) FP4 operations per cycle. It reads two
input matrices of size 32x64 and outputs, or accumulates into
a 32x32 FP32 or BF16/FP16 matrix. For FP8 and BF16, it
performs half or 1/8th of the MAC operations and supports
32x32 or 32x8 input matrices, respectively. This means that
the input dataflow bandwidth at 2 GHz is 2024 GiB/s per
operand and the output bandwidth is up to 4096 GiB/s (with
an additional 4096 GiB/s read bandwidth for accumulation).
Thus, the memories can hold work for the TTU for more
than 700 cycles, which enables full-utilization pipelining.
Each TVP works on TSMEM such that it can perform post-
processing of the matrix outputs and TTUs can also read
one input operand from TSMEM to enable efficient chains of
operations. The memories are orchestrated through Tile DMA
engine dataflow commands, which support optional reshaping.
The Tile DMA can use the Tile NoC to communicate with
neighboring tiles or the Cluster NoC to access the Cluster
SRAM.
The overall system comprises many dozens of different
DMA engines, some move data between on-chip SRAMs
and/or HBM, some move data into the network to remote
SRAMs or HBM. NoC QoS priorities can be assigned on a
per-command basis. The utility fabric fully connects all Sync
blocks, which can each notify any other Sync block of the
SoC at lowest latency.
4) Datatypes and Conversion Acceleration:Maia 200 sup-
ports a flurry of different datatypes and formats. In line with
its dataflow principles, it separates betweenstorage data types
and compute data types. Storage data types are used in the data
management path to reduce the number of bits transported
and stored while maintaining better accuracy than lower bit
formats. Sparse tensor storage is the main storage datatype.
The Reshaper unit can convert between wider and narrower
data types using stochastic rounding or round to nearest. It
can also load from 8:16 or 4:16 sparse tensors to/from dense
tensors at full bandwidth.
Each TTU supports BF16, FP8, FP6, and FP4, with 8192,
32 768, 32 768, and 65 536 MACs, respectively. FP6 achieves
the same performance as FP8 but at significant energy sav-
ings through gating. TTUs read matrices of size 32xKx32
Datatype Lanes
INT8/UINT8 512
INT16/UINT16 256
INT32/UINT32 128
BFP16 256
FP16 256
FP4 (E2M1, E1M2) 256
FP6 (E3M2, E2M3) 256
FP8 (E4M3, E5M2) 256
FP32 128
in blocked FP4 and FP8 for-
mats (e.g., K=32 for FP8
and K=64 for FP4) and out-
put FP32 or BF16 at 262.14
Tflop/s for FP4 multiplica-
tions at 2 GHz. Each TVP
supports a richer set of data
formats for vector opera-
tions, which are shown in the
adjacent table. TVPs imple-
ment 256 lanes for types up to 16-bit width at 3.07 Tflop/s
and 128 lanes for FP32 at 1.54 Tflop/s at 2 GHz.
The FP8 format supports E4M3 and E5M2 layouts, the
FP6 format supports E2M3 and E3M2 layouts and the FP4
format supports the E1M2, E2M1 layouts. Maia 200 allows
1180 Tflop/s 
169
bf16 Performance [Tflop/s]
Arithmetic Intensity
Theoretically
Bandwidth Bound
Theoretically
Peak-bf16 Bound
Fig. 4. BF16 Matrix Multiply Performance for 6143 Relevant Matrix Sizes.
programmers to compose those formats into OCP compliant
MXFP data types with E8M0 scaling factors and group sizes
of 32 [52].
5) Software-Defined Dataflow Control:The control path
is the last missing piece to a full SDLA microarchitecture.
Maia 200 combines three hierarchy levels of control: the SoC,
Cluster, and Tile levels. Each of those levels has several control
processors. Those processors are running C/C++ programs of
the user to orchestrate the data path using the Dataflow ISA
defined above. Those processors usually run slightly ahead of
the dataflow to configure the engines before they are used.
Slightly larger staging memories (CSRAM, TSRAM) support
this asynchronicity and allow the control processors to stash
enough work such that units are never waiting for work.
Data-dependent data-to-control dependencies require a quick
connection from the data path to the control path.
Maia’s hierarchical architecture benefits such data-
dependent control in that they can happen in the same tile
and the data-to-control remains between adjacent units.
For example, for a mixture of experts operation in which
a routing function decides where to send activations to,
the TVP evaluates the output of the TTU routing matrix
multiplication in TSRAM and hands off the result to the
TCP in a small number of cycles to kick-off preconfigured
data movement operations to each destination. The control
for this data-dependent flow (from TTU result to the TVP
to the TCP) can be set up in advance through semaphores
and DMA operations that get their scatter-gather operations
from the TVP. This enables fastest local control for quickly
changing data-dependencies. Similar methods can be used to
support local implementations for sparse processing [26].
6) Power, Energy, and Management:Maia 200 is a com-
plex system, and we skipped over most of the management
functionality. For example, the details of how each control
processor is configured and how kernels are launched are
complex but less scientifically interesting. We now highlight
some of those aspects that are most interesting to performance-
conscious users and engineers.
Maia 200 offers a flexible Dynamic V oltage and Frequency
Scaling (DVFS) system where each of the four clusters as well
as the Global NoC are in different frequency domains. This
4719 Tflop/s 
674
 4500
5000fp8 Performance [Tflop/s]
Arithmetic Intensity
Theoretically
Peak-fp8 Bound
Theoretically
Bandwidth Bound
Fig. 5. FP8 Matrix Multiply Performance for 6143 Relevant Matrix Sizes.
allows us to deploy configurations optimized for prefill (high
compute and high memory clocks) or token generation (lower
compute and high memory clocks) to optimize for specific
use-cases.
Maia 200 also offers a fully secure boot system and it is
seamlessly integrated into Azure’s compute philosophy and
management.
7) Roofline Matrix Multiply Performance:We continue by
investigating the most important workload in deep learning
inference: low precision matrix multiplication. Here, we focus
on the most relevant formats today: multiplying two bf16
matrices and multiplying two fp8 matrices. Both of those
operations output bf16 matrices. We benchmark a Maia 200
system with 9 Tiles per cluster enabled running at 2 GHz
(unthrottled). Thus, the peak bf16 performance is 262.14·4·
9 = 1180 Tflop/s and the peak fp8 performance is 4785 Tflop/s.
The roofline’s ridge point [74] lies at an arithmetic intensity
of 674 for fp8 and 169 for bf16, respectively.
Fig. 4 shows a scatterplot of 6143 relevant matrix multi-
plications of different sizes that are relevant for AI inference
workloads, spanning arithmetic intensities from 85 to 5000.
We measured each matrix size performance by repeatedly
loading the input matrices from HBM and writing back into
HBM. The measurement was repeated until the time exceeded
1ms to amortize the timer accuracy. The variation across mea-
surements is minimal due to the explicit SDLA programming
and the absence of caches. We achieve remarkably highbf16
roofline efficiency up to 99.69% of peakin the compute
bounded regime. The near-100% utilization is due to the asyn-
chronous nature of data movement and SDLA programming.
All instructions and data loading can overlap and all units are
busy, synchronized by semaphores. We exceed 90% of the
peak flop performance for multiplications using more than 58
Tflop of compute. In the memory bound regime, we achieve
up to 51.4% of the peak bandwidth due to the smaller size
of the matrices (larger ones quickly become compute bound).
We achieved higher than 50% bandwidth for combined input
and output operands bigger than 113.5 MiB. In both regimes,
we outperform comparable GPUs and CPUs but consciously
refrain from a direct comparison as this study aims to show
the architectural efficiency of SDLA and Maia 200 using real
Sender
NSYNC
Receiver
ANC NSYNCANC
recv(raddr, size, s_sem, c_sem)
CCP
send(saddr, size, s_sem, c_sem)
wait(s_sem)
inc(c_sem)
CCP
wait(s_sem)
inc(c_sem)
Fig. 6. ATL’s Receiver-driven Messaging Scheme.
benchmarks.
Fig. 5 shows similar data and performance for fp8 matrix
multiplications in a very similar setup with the same matrix
sizes and experimental methodology. Here, we span arithmetic
intensities from 95 to 4600 and achieve up to 96% of the peak
performance in the compute-bound regime and up to 56% in
the memory-bound regime.
C. Connecting Many SoCs into a Distributed Compute Cluster
Maia 200 uses 28 integrated 400 Gbps Ethernet-based AI
Network Controllers (ANC) for a total bandwidth of 1.4 TB/s
full duplex. The ANCs are heavily optimized for minimal chip
space and energy consumption. They are fully integrated into
the SDLA microarchitecture to which they offer programmable
DMA engines, synchronization, and seamless data movement
to remote SRAM and HBM memories. Over the lossless
(PFC) Ethernet L2 network they run Microsoft’s in-house AI
Transport Layer version 2 (ATLv2) protocol [24] to implement
network transport that later influenced the standardization of
Ultra Ethernet [29], [71].
For packet transmission, the ATLv2 protocol uses standard
L2 Ethernet frames with L3 IP routing headers and full end-
to-end AES-GCM-256 encryption and a simple window-based
congestion control scheme. It supports ECMP and entropy
vectors encoded in the position of the UDP source port
for per-packet load balancing and it uses a protocol similar
to REPS [11], [36] for recycling entropies of known-to-be-
good paths. It supports selective retransmit to overcome well-
known limits of Go-Back-N retransmission [28]. Furthermore,
it supports QoS not only in the network but also in the GNoC
towards HBM to make sure messages are delivered without
causing network back-up.
The SDLA functionality to access remote memories are
exposed through send/receive where the sender specifies a send
buffer and the receiver specifies a receive buffer (or multiple
in the case of broadcasting) for the message to be copied into.
We implement those semantics using Remote Direct Mem-
ory Access (RDMA) in the ANC. We use a receiver-driven
messaging scheme that is optimized for AI communication
in Collective Communication Libraries (*CCLs) to minimize
message matching state. This scheme inspired the AI Base
profile that was later standardized in Ultra Ethernet [29], [71]
and is shown in Fig. 6.
In Fig. 6, the Sender CCP posts a send operation that
will start after the start semaphore (s sem) fires and it will
increment the completion semaphore (c sem). At the receiver,
the CCP posts a receive with similar start and completion
semaphores. The receiver waits for its s sem to fire and then
sends a control message containing the receive address to
the sender. The sender’s ANC will await a message from
the receiver and once it receives it wait for the s sem to
fire. If both conditions are true, it will issue an RDMA write
message to the receiver’s address. Upon reception of the write
command, the receiver increments its c sem and once the
sender receives the acknowledgement of the successful write
operation, it in turn triggers its local c sem. Note that this
protocol does not require any buffering in the ANC as it
can always retransmit the data via DMA from the source
memories. The ANC itself splits each message into multiple
packets that are sent in any order and both sender and receiver
use bitmaps to track message completion. The system is
optimized for messages larger than 4 kiB, which is common
in AI workloads [24].
The system supports packet spraying across multiple ANCs
along different network paths. ANCs also support remote
semaphore increment together with data transmission as well
as remote data broadcast to clusters on the GNoC. Messages
can be written into remote CSRAM or HMB. This makes re-
mote nodes seamless peers in the overall SDLA programming
model.
The system design combines fixed connections on the same
blade with switched connections. The topology is a special
case of a 2x2 1D Hamming Mesh [27] where cross links are
added on each board establishing full connectivity in the group
collocated on a physical tray. Of the 28 ANCs per SoC, 20
are connected with fixed links as shown in Fig. 7, and eight
are connected to a switched network. The switched network
consists of four identical planes and each SoC connects with
two 400G ANCs to each plane. While the switched ANC
links can be connected into any topology with hundreds of
thousands of endpoints, the current design point is aimed at a
two-tier network with a maximum of 6144 SoCs for inference
deployments. In this configuration, each of the 51.2T (128
400G ports) Tier-0 (T0) switches is connected to 48 Maia 200
SoCs in 12 trays with two links each. The remaining 32 ports
are connected to up to 32 Tier-1 (T1) switches with a 1:3
oversubscription ratio. Thus, the overall number of SoCs is
48·128 = 6144. Smaller subset configurations are possible and
deployed in the field. The chips and trays themselves can also
be used to build larger-scale systems by adding more tiers of
switches or changing the topology.
1) Collective Communication Performance:Collective
communications are critical for deep learning performance. We
now discuss how basic algorithms are implemented in Maia
200. We focus on initial implementations of two algorithms,
direct-connect and ring [69], while we fully acknowledge
that the performance can be improved with more elaborate
algorithms (e.g., Bine Trees [17]). Yet, our purpose here is
to demonstrate the efficacy and performance of the SLDA
6x400G
6x400G
7x400G
7x400G
Tray 0 Tray 11
6x400G
6x400G
7x400G
7x400G
…
Switch Plane 0
Switch Plane 1
Switch Plane 2
Switch Plane 3
Rack 0
…
T0-1 T0-127
T1-31T1-0
…
…
…
2*4*12 = 96 down
32 up
Rack 127
96 down
32 up
2x400G
1x400G
6x400G
6x400G
7x40
0G
7x40
0G
6x400G
6x400G
7x40
0G
7x40
0G
6x400G
6x400G
7x40
0G
7x40
0G
6x400G
6x400G
7x40
0G
7x40
0G
6x400G
6x400G
7x40
0G
7x40
0G
6x400G
6x400G
7x40
0G
7x40
0G
6x400G
6x400G
7x40
0G
7x40
0G
6x400G
6x400G
7x40
0G
7x40
0G
6x400G
6x400G
7x40
0G
7x40
0G
6x400G
6x400G
7x40
0G
7x40
0G
6x400G
6x400G
7x40
0G
7x40
0G
6x400G
6x400G
7x40
0G
7x40
0G
128 down 128 down
Fig. 7. Maia 200’s Two-Tier Network Topology.
1400 GiB/s 
Measured Network Bandwidth [GiB/s]
Allgather Size [per chip]
1 kiB 10 kiB 100 kiB 1 MiB 10 MiB 100 MiB 500 MiB
Direct Allgather
Ring Allgather
break-even
around 9 MiB
Theoretically
Bandwidth Bound
Theoretically
Latency Bound
Fig. 8. Allgather Benchmark Results on 8 Maia 200 Chips in Two Trays
architecture and specifically Maia 200’s system design running
production workloads.
The direct connect algorithm simply sends the right pieces
of the data directly to the target endpoints. The ring algorithm
established a logical one-dimensional ring connecting all chips
and sends chunks of data in a pipelined manner along the
ring such that all accelerators send and receive at all times.
Details on those standard algorithms can be found in Thakur
et al. [69]. The key difference between them is that the
direct connect algorithm has a message depth (longest path
of depending message synchronizations) of one: no message
depends on another message to be received. Thus, direct
connect has the lowest latency. Yet, it may not utilize the
bandwidth most efficiently. Ring on the other hand has the
longest message depth of P-1 for communicators with P chips
but is well-known to be bandwidth efficient for large messages.
Thus, we expect the direct algorithm to perform best for small
messages and the ring algorithm for large.
Furthermore, we establish thespeed of light (SoL)bounds
that either algorithm cannot exceed using a simple assessment
based on latency and bandwidth. We estimate the maximum
small-message latency of the network to be around 4us
when traversing through the switched part. Fig. 7 shows the
bandwidth configuration. While the tray design may seem
asymmetric, i.e., north-south links can carry only 300 GB/s
while east-west and diagonal can carry 350 GB/s, we note
that the switched part of the network (400 GB/s) can flexibly
Heat Exchanger 
up to 12
Maia 200
trays
CPU Nodes
CPU Nodes
Switches
51.2T
SoC 0
 SoC 1
SoC 2
 SoC 3
Fig. 9. Maia 200 Tray (left) and Rack for Deployment in Air-Cooled
Environments (right)
be used to balance the bandwidth by using 50 GB/s bandwidth
to strengthen the north-south links. This would lead to a
fully balanced system of 350 GB/s for all four directions,
leading to a total of 1.4 TB/s balanced network bandwidth.
This switched design makes configurations more flexible and
allows programmers to adjust mappings to different traffic
requirements [27].
We do not intend to provide a fully exhaustive bench-
marking study but rather demonstrate the efficacy of SDLA
for real-world workloads. Thus, we focus our analysis on
one of the most important collective operations for LLM
inference: Allgather is a central component in Fully Sharded
Data Parallel LLM inference [64], [78] and 3D parallelism
using narrow datatypes [56]. In Allgather, all chips collect data
from all other chips (e.g., weights or activations). Specifically,
for a communicator of sizePand a communication volume
ofNBytes per process, each chip receivesR=N(P−1)
Bytes. The speed of light for this operation would thus be
SoL= max

4us, R
1.4TiB/s

. Fig. 8 shows the speed of light
as upper bound to the bandwidth (in black) and measured
benchmark results on 8 chips for relevant data sizes in our
production workloads. We achieve 78% of the latency bound
as well as 94% of the bandwidth bound defined by the
architectural limits, meeting or exceeding similar architectures.
In practice, AI workloads run a multi-algorithm through a
collective communication library similar to NCCL [31] or
MCCL [32] that chooses the fastest implementation based on
the input parameters.
2) Azure integration:Maia 200 is fully integrated into Mi-
crosoft’s Azure datacenters. The package is liquid cooled and
can be connected to liquid cooling datacenter infrastructure.
A tray is shown in the left part of Fig. 9. Since liquid cooling
is not standard in most datacenters yet, Maia 200 can be
deployed in air-cooled datacenters by using an integrated heat
exchanger as shown in the right part of Fig. 9. Maia 200 uses
standard Ethernet cabling and switches for all networking. This
deep integration into existing Azure infrastructure contributes
to the total TCO savings.
TABLE I
QWEN2.5 7B MATRIXMULTIPLICATION ANDLOADSIZES
Operation Shape [N x K x M] Count Size [MiB]